#summary Some remarks on Bourbaki's _Theory of Sets_

= Introduction =

I once tried to read Bourbaki's _Theory of Sets_ but found it utterly incoherent. It turns out that really, only the "Summary of Results" are necessary for understanding set theory. But I found out a beautiful project translating Bourbaki's _Theory of Sets_ into `Coq` code (for the automatic theorem prover [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coq `Coq`]).

  # J. Grimm, "Implementation of Bourbaki's Elements of Mathematics in Coq: Part One, Theory of Sets" [http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/40/81/43/PDF/RR-6999.pdf ePrint (PDF)] --- note it is 204 pages.
  # J. Grimm, "Implementation of Bourbaki's Elements of Mathematics in Coq: Part Two; Ordered Sets, Cardinals, Integers" [http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/44/07/86/PDF/RR-7150.pdf ePrint (pdf)] --- note it is 307 pages long.

Mr Grimm kindly explains the frustratingly cryptic notation and terms used by Bourbaki. For example

  Bourbaki defines (∃x)R as (τ,,x,,(R)|x)R. Write y instead of τ,,x,,(R). Our 
  expression is (y|x)R. It does not contain the variable x, since x is not in y. 
  If (∃x)R is true, then R is true for at least one object, namely y. 
  This object is explicit: we do not need to introduce a specific axiom of choice. 
  Axiom scheme S5 states the converse: if for some T, (T|x) R is true, then 
  (∃x)R is true. (Part 1, page 11)

This turns out to be Bourbaki's bizarre formulation of [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epsilon_calculus Epsilon Calculus] which has become more or less antiquated.

==Axioms==

This is a review of [http://texnicalstuff.blogspot.com/2011/10/epsilon-calculus.html my blogpost]. The basic five axioms for Bourbaki's set theory is:

  # Axiom of extension, A1. (∀ x)(∀ y)((x⊂y and y⊂x) implies (x=y)). (Sets II §1.4, pg 67) 
  # Axiom of the set of two elements, a.k.a. Axiom of Pairing, A2. (∀ x)(∀ y) Coll,,z,,(z=x or z=y). (Sets II §1.5, pg 69)
  # Axiom of the ordered pair (Sets II §2.1, pg 72): (∀ x)(∀ x')(∀ y) (∀ y') (((x,y) = (x',y')) implies (x=x' and y=y')) 
  # Axiom of the set of subsets (Sets II §5.1, pg 101): (∀ X) Coll,,Y,, (Y⊂X). In other words, for any set X, we can form its power set. 
  # Axiom of infinity (Sets III §6.1, pg 183): A5. There exists an infinite set. 

This is formally equivalent to the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo_set_theory Zermelo formulation] of set theory.

The epsilon calculus gives the axiom of _global_ choice. Yes, _global_ choice.

How? Well, we have the rule of inference:

  ∀x ((A(x) if and only if B(x)) implies (εx A = εx B)) 

which gives us the axiom of _global_ choice, because here the epsilon operator acts as the _choice operator_.