#summary Notes concerning the Springer-Verlag monograph documentclass.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

= Introduction =

You can find the `SVMono.cls` file in the package provided to Springer-Verlag authors, which is available [http://www.springer.com/cda/content/document/cda_downloaddocument/svmono.zip?SGWID=0-0-45-491898-0 here] I hope.

I'm just writing a few notes concerning how to use this thing. The intended goal is to eventually have a cohesive set of notes, so that I can compile it all into one fancy "book". This documentclass seems most sophisticated, so I decided to use it.

= Details =

I am actually going to have to create some macros which translate my macros to the Springer-Verlag macros, e.g.

{{{
\newenvironment{thm}{\begin{theorem}}{\end{theorem}}
}}}

*Remark:* Actually, if one uses the `nospthms` options for the `svmono.cls`, then one can use one's own theorem macros. This would probably be the better approach for me.

Additionally there is the matter of getting stuff done quickly. It is actually better, I think, to do something like the following: create a folder `~/docs/` then start creating subdirectories `~/docs/001/` which are "galley proofs". That is to say, they are written as articles and depend only on the stuff _before_ it (so 006 can depend on 001 through 005). In this manner, you organize your notes in a logical and cohesive manner. You also write more and faster since writing an article can be done in nearly no time at all. 

To be consistent with notation, have a single file for macros (aptly referred to as `~/docs/macros.tex`) so you have consistent notation throughout.

What I tend to do is also include a `~/docs/ref/` directory which then has a number of other people's `PDF`'s that are references to my notes.

== Fonts ==

It appears that the package to use is `type1cm.sty` which automagically scales fonts, and it doesn't look horrible.

== QED Symbol ==

We have the following code:

{{{
\newcommand\slug{\hbox{\kern1.5pt\vrule width2.5pt height6pt depth1.5pt\kern1.5pt}}
\renewcommand\qedsymbol{\slug}
}}}

Alternatively we may simply write

{{{
\renewcommand\qedsymbol{\hbox{\kern1.5pt\vrule width2.5pt height6pt depth1.5pt\kern1.5pt}}
}}}

The rest appears to be taken care of.

=== Proof Environment ===

Although the given code for theorem environments is cute (to say the least), I do not like it. One has to manually add the `\qed` which is irritating. I think I should probably write my own macros...

*Remark:* Actually, it seems wiser to use one's own customized theorem macros rather than some "God given" set of theorem macros.

== Page Size ==

We are told in the "Author Instructions for Monographs" (`instruct.pdf`) in 2.2 that:

  This will set the text area to a `\textwidth` of 117 mm or 27.75
  pica and a `\textheight` of 191 mm or 45.166667 pica plus a
  `\headsep` of 12 pt (space between the running head and text). 
  
  _N.B._ Trim size (physical paper size) is 155 × 235 mm or 6.125
  × 9.25 in. 

Good to know. The exact code comes from lines 232--239 of `svmono.cls`:

{{{
\setlength{\textwidth}{117mm}
%\setlength{\textheight}{12pt}\multiply\textheight by 45\relax
\setlength{\textheight}{191mm}
\setlength{\topmargin}{0cm}
\setlength\oddsidemargin{63\p@}
\setlength\evensidemargin{63\p@}
\setlength\marginparwidth{90\p@}
\setlength\headsep{12\p@}
}}}

The next set of lines sets `\parindent` to be equal to 12pt (lines 241--243), it also sets `\parskip` to be `\z@ \@plus \p@` (line 244) and modifies `\hfuzz` and `\arraycolsep`. French spacing is apparently used.